feat: initial docs for permissions and capabilities (#406)
GetStream/stream-video-js: packages/client/docusaurus/docs/client/05-advanced/03-permissions-and-capabilities.mdx

title: Permissions and Capabilities
---

import SDKSpecific from '../SDKSpecific';

## Introduction

> In some types of calls, there is a common requirement for participant moderation.

Reviewer: Is participant moderation the correct term here? 

When I glance over it, I'd connect it to content moderation, so kicking users out if necessary. But the permissions and capabilities are much more than that.

Maybe we could go the route of:

```suggestion
In many types of calls, there is a requirement for providing different users with certain permissions and capabilities.
```

Author: Good point... we keep referring to this feature as "moderation" but, this can be understood differently but our audience. I'll try to avoid using the term "moderation" from now on.

A typical example is a webinar where the host wants to control who can speak or who can share their video or screen.

> Stream Video SDK provides a certain set of permissions and capabilities
> that can be used to control the behavior of participants in a call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Stream Video SDK provides a certain set of permissions and capabilities
that can be used to control the behavior of participants in a call.
```

Reviewer: Also: is it a pre-built set of permissions and capabilities? Can it be expanded to meet users' needs if they require more control?

Author: I think the set of permissions and capabilities is finite and can be assigned to a specific user role or call type. Roles and Call types would be eventually configurable on our Dashboard.

## Permissions

As soon as you join a call, the `Call` instance would allow you to check the permissions of the local user
or perform some permission-related actions:

### Check permissions

```ts
import { OwnCapability } from '@stream-io/video-client';

const call = streamVideoClient.call(type, id);
const canSendAudio = call.permissionsContext.hasPermission(
  OwnCapability.SEND_AUDIO,
);
```

<SDKSpecific name="react">
In our React Video SDK, you can use the [`useHasPermissions`](../04-call-engine/hooks.md#useHasPermissions) hook to check for permissions.

```tsx
const canSendAudio = useHasPermissions(OwnCapability.SEND_AUDIO);
```

</SDKSpecific>

### Request permissions

> Every user may request permissions to perform certain action depending on the call type and call settings.
> For example, in an audio-room call type, only the hosts have `send-audio` permission by default.
> Other users should request this permission before they can start sending audio if the call settings allow it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every user may request permission to perform certain actions depending on the call type and call settings.
For example, in an audio-room call type, only the hosts have `send-audio` permission by default.
Other users should request this permission before they can start sending audio if the call settings allow it.
```

> 

Reviewer: Could we provide an overview over the different call types and the default permissions here? 

Not sure it's the best place, but that could be incredibly helpful to have a place to go to to see that...

I'm thinking of a simple table maybe...

Author: I think we should/would have a special chapter for the Call Types overview, together with their default configuration, roles, permissions, and capabilities. Ideally, this page would be shared across all SDKs as the content of it would be generic.

Notion reference:
- https://www.notion.so/stream-wiki/Call-Types-Permissions-9741753a0d77428fb4ff51dc1328314e

Author: I've created a task for you on our Notion board.

```ts
import { OwnCapability } from '@stream-io/video-client';

const call = streamVideoClient.call(type, id);
if (!call.permissionsContext.canRequest(OwnCapability.SEND_AUDIO)) {
  console.log('The host has disabled the ability to request this permission');
  return;
}
await call.requestPermissions({
  permissions: [OwnCapability.SEND_AUDIO],

> });

Reviewer: I NEED EXACTLY THIS FOR THE AUDIO ROOMS! Nice! :)

```

### Approving permission requests

> Call hosts and moderators can approve permission requests from other users.
> Whenever a user requests a permission, a `call.permission_request` event will be emitted on the `Call` instance.
> You can listen to this event and approve the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Call hosts and moderators can approve permission requests from other users.
Whenever a user requests a certain permission, a `call.permission_request` event will be emitted on the `Call` instance.
You can listen to this event and approve the request.
```

```ts
import { PermissionRequestEvent } from '@stream-io/video-client';

const call = streamVideoClient.call(type, id);

> call.on('permission_request', async (request: PermissionRequestEvent) => {
>   if (shouldApproveRequest(request)) {
>     await call.updateUserPermissions({
>       user_id: request.user_id,
>       grant_permissions: [...request.permissions],
>     });
>   }
> });

Reviewer: ```suggestion
call.on('call.permission_request', (event: StreamCallEvent) => {
    const request = event as PermissionRequestEvent;
    if (shouldApproveRequest(request)) {
      await call.updateUserPermissions({
        user_id: request.user_id,
        grant_permissions: [...request.permissions],
    });
  }
});
```

```

### Moderation

At any time, a moderator or host can decide to either grant or revoke certain permission to any participant.

```ts
import { OwnCapability } from '@stream-io/video-client';

const call = streamVideoClient.call(type, id);
await call.updateUserPermissions({
  user_id: 'demo-user',
  grant_permission: [OwnCapability.SEND_AUDIO, OwnCapability.SEND_VIDEO],
  revoke_permissions: [OwnCapability.SCREENSHARE],
});
```

The end user would get notified via a WebSocket event with a type: `call.permissions_updated`.
In the case of revoked permissions, the SDK would automatically stop publishing the appropriate tracks.

### Muting participants

In addition to granting or revoking permissions, a moderator or host can also mute a participant.
This is a common scenario as quite often, participants may be a source of unwanted noise or distraction.

```ts
const call = streamVideoClient.call(type, id);
await call.muteUser('demo-user-id', 'audio');
await call.muteUser('demo-user-id', 'video');
await call.muteUser('demo-user-id', 'screenshare');

// or, mute in bulk
await call.muteUser(['demo-user-id', 'demo-user-id-2'], 'audio');

// or, mute all
await call.muteAllUsers('audio');

> ```

Reviewer: Should we add an example of how to mute yourself here? That should be a quite common scenario as well, right?

Author: Yes, essentially that would be using our own "user_id" as an argument. I'll add support for it in the Client.

This operation doesn't revoke any permission, and the user would still be able to un-mute itself.

### Ending call for everyone

In some cases, a moderator or host may want to end the call for everyone.

```ts
const call = streamVideoClient.call(type, id);
await call.endCall();
```

This operation will emit `call.ended` event to every participant in the call.
The SDK would automatically stop publishing any tracks and leave the call.

Ended calls can't be re-joined.

## Capabilities

> Every user connecting to a Stream Call, has a set of [Capabilities](../).
> The capabilities of the local user live in the metadata of the `Call` instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every user connecting to a Stream Call has a set of [Capabilities](../).
The capabilities of the local user live in the metadata of the `Call` instance.
```
